>> Silver amalgam fillings,
does it contain mercury?
>> It does.
>> Why is it that the ADIA
will not tell the public that
mercury amalgam is harmful?
>>EDWARD GROUP: Our
guest, Dr. Blanche Grube,
shared with us the work of her
mentor Dr. Hal Huggins, who
was one of the first
to uncover just how
harmful mercury is to the body.
Today, we'll dive further into
this vitally important subject.
Thanks for being
here, Dr. Blanche.
>>BLANCHE GRUBE: Thank you.
Thank you very much.
>>EDWARD: So tell us
what exactly is mercury?
>>GRUBE: Well,
mercury is an element.
It's a naturally forming
element in God's planet.
It is found in the Earth.
>>EDWARD: What
makes it so toxic?
>>GRUBE: To keep
it very simple, I
would say one molecule, one atom
of mercury, can kill one cell.
The difference is after
that cell is gone,
then that same molecule
or atom of mercury
then goes on and
kills another cell.
And that's what
makes it so toxic.
It's very difficult for the
body to get rid of the mercury
once it's inside.
>>EDWARD: So how was mercury
implemented in dentistry?
>>GRUBE: The Crawcour
brothers discovered
that if you took some nickel
shavings, literally shavings
from a nickel, nickel
shavings and mixed it
with mercury, after
a few minutes,
the combination of those
two elements would get hard.
And so I don't know
what made them-- maybe
they had a few too many
glasses of wine that night,
but they said, gee, let's
use this to fill the holes
in people's teeth.
>>EDWARD: What year was that?
>>GRUBE: Now that was about--
well, was 1834 in Europe.
By the time it really became
popular here in the United
States, it was the late 1920s.
>>EDWARD: And how did
that term become amalgam?
>>GRUBE: Well that's what it is.
It's a chemical term.
An amalgam is a mixture
of different metals
joined together.
So that's where the
word amalgam comes from.
In our world, amalgam
always in dentistry
always means mercury mixed with
silver, tin, copper, and zinc.
So you have four
different shavings
of metal mixed with mercury.
The day it's made,
it's 54% mercury.
The other 46% is the
little metal shavings.
>>EDWARD: So just to be clear,
silver fillings and mercury
fillings--
>>GRUBE: Are the same.
>>EDWARD: --are the same?
>>GRUBE: Right.
And silver fillings really
only have about 15% silver.
Why do we call them
silver fillings?
We should rightfully call
them mercury fillings.
>>EDWARD: When did
the evidence first
come out that mercury
fillings were actually bad?
>>GRUBE: I think since
the beginning of time.
Since scientists began
looking at the elements
and the elemental
table was developed,
they knew that mercury was bad.
And so when the Crawcour
brothers brought amalgam over
to New York, everybody
knew it was bad.
But they were stubborn
and they continued
to push their theories.
And they had a lot of
dentists who said, well,
do you know what, this
is much easier than doing
a gold filling.
It's much easier.
It's much cheaper.
We're going to do that.
Now at that period of time,
you had two different kinds
of dentists.
You had the dentist who
was a medical doctor who
also did dentistry almost
as a side specialty.
And then you had the everyday
barber who also did dentistry.
So it's very interesting
that, in those days,
the barbers were the ones
who liked amalgam, because it
was cheap and easy to use.
And they were called
the quacks, because they
used quecksilber, which is
the German word for mercury.
So they were called the quacks.
And the regular MDs, Medical
Doctors, who did dentistry,
were not the quacks.
>>EDWARD: Were they buying that
from a company at that time or
were they actually making it?
>>GRUBE: They were actually
making it themselves.
>>EDWARD: Wow.
>>GRUBE: They were
actually shaving
the nickel
themselves, the coins,
and mixing the mercury with it.
And I'm sure they all died
young, because it was so toxic.
>>EDWARD: Let's now
take a step back in time
and learn a bit about
the history of dentistry
as it's practiced in the US.
What you're about to see is
from a powerful documentary
called evidence of harm.
>>In the early 1800s, s
organized dentistry was still
in its infancy.
As there were no dental
schools or licensing boards,
it was common that craftsmen,
such as the local barber
or blacksmith, might also
practice dentistry, which,
at the time, amounted to little
more than having teeth pulled
or gold fillings
placed in cavities.
Dental mercury's introduction
to the United States
came in 1833 by the
Crawcour brothers of France.
They called it royal mineral
succedaneum, a handmade mixture
of melted silver coin shavings
and elemental mercury.
The lower cost of
this combination
of mercury with another metal,
otherwise known as an amalgam,
enabled a larger portion
of the population
to afford the services
of those dentists who
used amalgam fillings.
But a bitter controversy started
brewing over the use of mercury
as a restorative material.
And by 1843, the world's first
national dental organization,
the American Society
of Dental Surgeons,
passed a resolution stating
that the use of amalgam
was considered to
be malpractice.
The American Society
of Dental Surgeons
asked members to
sign a pledge never
to place what the
organization referred to
as poison metal fillings.
And those members who did use
amalgam risked being expelled.
And by 1856, the American
Society of dental surgeons
disbanded.
In its place rose the American
Dental Association in 1859,
which, to this day,
continues to promote
the safety of mercury fillings.
>>GRUBE: That was the
beginning of Amalgam War I.
>>EDWARD: So what
is Amalgam War I?
>>GRUBE: Well,
you had the battle
between the medical doctors who
were scientifically oriented
who said, wait a minute,
you can't put mercury
into a human body.
You're going to kill the person.
If you have a little
bit of arsenic every day
in your coffee,
it will kill you.
And the same is true of mercury.
So you had the medical
doctors who said,
you can't put mercury
in somebody's mouth.
And then you had the barber
dentists or the quacks
who were very much in favor.
And unfortunately,
as history proved,
the quacks grew faster in
number than the American Dental
Society grew.
And unfortunately, the
American Dental Society
fell out of favor.
Medicine then separated
itself from dentistry.
So right from the beginning,
the American Dental Association
has always been in
favor of using amalgam.
>>EDWARD: What was
Amalgam War II?
>>GRUBE: Amalgam War II
came across when a doctor
by the name of Alfred Stock--
he was a German doctor--
he began looking just
before World War I,
he began looking at the
toxicity of mercury.
And he started
writing some papers.
And so then there was
a lot said about it.
There was a lot
of arguments made.
And then suddenly, the War broke
out and it got forgotten again.
And it stayed quiet until 1984
when Dr. Hal Huggins published
a book "It's All In Your Head".
And that was the beginning
of Amalgam War III.
Dr. Huggins had met in 1973, Dr.
Huggins had gone to Mexico City
to give a lecture on nutrition.
Dr. Huggins was always
interested in nutrition
and its relationship
to dentistry,
which was a great thing.
So he was actually one of
the favorites of the American
Dental Association at that time,
because he was one of the few
who was talking about nutrition.
He was talking about nutrition
and he showed a few slides
where the patient
did not get better.
With fantastic nutrition, the
patient still had gum disease.
At the end of the lecture, a
fellow by the name of Olympio
Pinto, who was a dentist
from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
he walked up to the podium
and he asked Dr. Huggins
if he would like to know
why those patients did not
get better.
And, of course, Dr.
Huggins said, sure.
I'd love to know why those
patients didn't get better.
He said to them, it's
because you did not remove
their mercury fillings first.
So all the nutrition
in the world
was not going to heal
their gum disease.
Well, it turns out that
Olympio Pinto's father was one
of the first dentists in Brazil
to remove mercury fillings from
a small young girl-- probably
about nine, 10 years old--
who had developed leukemia.
And he removed her fillings
in her leukemia disappeared.
And of course, he
was criticized.
He went ahead and placed the
fillings back in her mouth
and the leukemia came back.
And then, of course,
the parents insisted
on him taking the fillings
out for a second time.
So that was Olympio
Pinto's father.
And then came Olympio Pinto
who grew up understanding
how toxic mercury was.
And then he came to Mexico
City and met Dr. Hal Huggins,
gave him the news.
Dr. Hal Huggins came
back to Colorado Springs
and he began looking
at his patients who
had mercury fillings.
And he would actually
do a blood test on them,
remove the mercury
fillings, and then
do another blood test on them
afterwards and compare the two.
After he'd completed
about 20 patients
and he saw the remarkable
improvement in their blood
chemistry after their mercury
fillings were removed,
he got very excited about this.
He prepared all of his notes,
he went to the American Dental
Association in
Chicago, and he thought
for sure they were going to
recommend the Nobel Prize.
They would at least
pat him on the back
and congratulate
him on letting them
know how toxic amalgam was.
That's not exactly
what happened.
>>EDWARD: That was before
he wrote the book, right?
>>GRUBE: That was before
he wrote the book.
They were not interested
in what he had to say.
So he decided to write the book
and take it to the lay people,
take it to the public, let
them know what was going on.
And that's what started
Amalgam War III.
And at that point,
then something
called the gag order was passed.
And that was a semi law.
Because there's laws that are
passed in courtrooms and that
all of the lawyers know about.
But then there are
laws that are passed
in professional societies that
are not necessarily quote laws.
So the gag law was passed
that said that if any dentist
mentions the M word--
and meaning mercury--
to their patients,
they would have their license
revoked for unethical behavior.
>>EDWARD: For something that's
actually killing the patient?
>>GRUBE: It's something that's
actually killing the patient.
So once that law was
passed, the dentists
couldn't even talk to
their patients about it.
>>EDWARD: Well,
here's Dr. Hal Huggins
on his revolutionary
research into mercury.
>> What, in your opinion, is
causing so many health problems
today?
>>HAL HUGGINS (ON
VIDEO): My opinion?
Well, from what I
see having worked
in this field for about 44
of my 50 years in practice,
the majority of what I see is
caused in the dental office.
The silver colored fillings are
really mercury silver colored.
So they're not really
silver fillings.
They are mercury fillings.
And mercury appears
to be a poison.
At least, everybody in science
thinks so except dentistry.
In fact, one of the interesting
quotations from dentistry
is, yes, mercury is the most
hazardous metal on the planet.
However, in the mouth
it's toxic properties
are rendered harmless.
I took a postdoctoral Master's
in Immunology and Toxicology
for about four years.
And I mentioned that to
the professors there.
And they got a real good
laugh out of that and said,
somebody must have
discovered alchemy.
Because wherever you
put mercury, it kills.
I was asking one
of my professors
in toxicology one time,
EPA has a safe level,
and OSHA has a safe
level, and dentistry
has a very high safe level.
What is a safe level?
And he looked at me--
this is in front of class,
so I was quite
taken by his answer,
because he started well, Doctor.
I knew I was in trouble.
He said, one atom
can kill one cell.
You tell me the safe level.
There is no safe level.
But why does dentistry use it?
Because it's cheap.
It's easy to place.
What more could you ask for?
>>EDWARD: So when he
came out with his book,
"It's All In Your Head",
exposing all this,
what was the response
in dentistry?
>>GRUBE: Conventional dentistry
wanted to tar and feather him
if they could.
No kidding.
>>EDWARD: So remind us all
again your first experience
with mercury and how
you dealt with that.
>>GRUBE: Well, my first
experience with mercury
was at the age of four.
Not knowing that
that's what it was,
I received my first
mercury filling as a child
and then received
quite a few after that.
Though, at the
age of 19, I began
working as a dental assistant.
And in those days, we
did not wear gloves.
Not that it would have helped,
because the mercury goes
through the glove.
We did not wear face masks.
And we actually mixed the
mercury with the powder,
shook it up in a little
machine, and then
squeezed it out with our hands.
The excess mercury would
squeeze out of the cheesecloth
and we would throw it
into a garbage can.
If we missed the
garbage can and it
landed on a rug similar
to this rug, so what?
Nobody really knew that we were
handling the most toxic element
on the planet.
We didn't know that.
So I started working
as a dental assistant.
And within a year of me
working as a dental assistant,
my thyroid gland swelled up
to the size of a grapefruit.
Dentists had just placed 18
new fresh fillings in my mouth.
Now they call it a heavy metal.
The reason they call it a heavy
metal is because it is heavy
and it literally drops from
the mouth down into the body.
So one of the first organs that
mercury attacks is the thyroid.
Then it goes down
and further, attacks,
and goes into your lungs,
goes into your stomach,
messes up your digestive system.
And then, ultimately, in old
age, most of people's mercury,
if they still have mercury
fillings in their mouth,
they will have them in their
prostate gland and, for women,
in their ovaries
and their uterus.
So it is a heavy metal.
It does sink from here all
the way down to the bottom.
So at the age of 19, I started
working as a dental assistant.
A year later, I had my
thyroid gland removed,
because the medical doctor
saw it on Monday and said, OK,
we're taking your
thyroid gland out.
And of course,
after the operation,
I said, so what did you find?
Was it cancerous?
Am I going to die?
What's going on?
They said, no, it was a benign
tumor, but it was enlarged.
So you have no thyroid
now and we're just
going to give you
thyroid medicine
for the rest of your life.
I said, really?
I said, well, what are the
repercussions of not having
a thyroid gland?
Well, you'll probably
have a heart attack
by the time you're 50.
Great.
OK, I had no idea.
Nobody made the connection
between the mercury
that I was handling on a
daily basis and the problems
I was having.
>>EDWARD: Wow.
What percentage
today of dentists
use mercury in their fillings?
>>GRUBE: At least 50%.
They did a survey
a few years ago
and found out the number was
actually 54% of the dentists
were using mercury still.
>>EDWARD: Why do
you think that is?
>>GRUBE: Because it's cheap.
Because it's easy to use.
Unfortunately, what
most people don't
realize is while
50% of the dentists
are still putting mercury
fillings in people's mouths,
it's not across
the economic board.
So you're not going to find
mercury fillings being placed
in upper middle
class neighborhoods,
because those people don't want
something ugly in their mouth.
Unfortunately, it is
being placed in the poorer
neighborhoods where many
people are either on disability
or not making enough
money to actually make
a choice to have
the slightly more
expensive composite filling.
And I have to say a word about
that, because while people say,
well, composites
are more expensive,
but they're really not.
They may be more expensive
the day they're put in.
But if you look at the life of
the filling and of the tooth,
actually, the mercury
amalgam filling
is more expensive, because
it's going to crack later
and it's going to
mean another filling.
And then it's going
to crack again
and it's going to mean
putting a crown on.
And then the tooth
is going to die
and it's going to mean
needing a root canal.
And then it's going
to need a post.
And then it's going to need a
crown and on, and on, and on.
So actually, the amalgam
filling in the long run
is a much more
expensive filling than
the simple composite filling.
>>EDWARD: When patients come
in and the dentists sit down
with them, the
dentists are explaining
to the patient about
the dangers of mercury
and the different
options that they have?
>>GRUBE: No, I'm sorry.
That doesn't happen.
That really doesn't happen.
The dentist does not
walk into the operatory--
that's the room where
the work is done--
does not walk into the operatory
with a menu and does not--
very often, doesn't even
tell the patient what
are you putting in the mouth.
They don't even
tell the patients.
So the patients don't know.
I've asked many people,
what's in your mouth?
And I don't know.
The dentist is God
in the dental office.
The dentist makes
all of the decisions.
>>EDWARD: So how does
the mercury actually
get released from the filling?
>>GRUBE: Well, mercury
is a volatile material,
which means that, at room
temperature, it is a liquid.
And it stays a liquid
until it's very, very cold.
So at room temperature,
it's a liquid.
And as we know in a
little bit of science,
all liquids evaporate
at all times.
If I was to put a droplet
of mercury or water,
for that matter, on
your hand, eventually,
it's going to evaporate.
Correct?
Well, that's the same
thing with mercury.
When you mix mercury
with all these powders
and you put it inside the
tooth, at 98.6 degrees, which
is body temperature,
that mercury
is now evaporating
twice as fast as it
would if you had that drop of
mercury sitting on a table.
So it's constantly evaporating,
24 hours a day, seven days
a week.
And the body is constantly
absorbing some of that mercury.
So we use a term
called cumulative,
which means it's cumulative.
In other words, more
mercury comes into the body
than can be released.
The average human being
is capable of releasing
30 micrograms--
micro meaning very small--
without getting too
technical here--
micrograms means very small--
a microgram, this is
thousandth of a milligram--
30 micrograms per day.
That's what the
average human being
is capable of getting rid of.
Well, we've measured
some mercury fillings
in people's mouths that
were emitting 30, 40, 50
micrograms per 10 seconds.
>>EDWARD: What about when
they eat certain foods, drink
hot liquids, anything like
that can increase the release?
>>GRUBE: Absolutely.
If you drink
something hot, you're
going to have more mercury
coming off your fillings.
If you chew gum, you're going
to have more mercury coming off
your fillings.
If you eat something
crunchy, crunchy granola--
granola is a good
thing, isn't it?
Yes, but if you eat
crunchy granola,
you're going to have
more mercury coming off
your fillings.
And fish, unfortunately,
all fish have mercury.
Fish do not metabolize
mercury, which
means whatever mercury they
take into their body, they keep.
So they're the ultimate ones
for holding on to mercury.
The larger the fish,
the more little fish
that fish has
eaten in the ocean.
Therefore, the larger the
fish, the more mercury it has.
So tuna, which is a very large
fish, loaded with mercury.
>>EDWARD: We actually have
a video here of mercury
being released from a filling.
Take a look.
>> The American Dental
Association has made
the argument that mercury
is fixed in amalgam fillings
and it doesn't come out easily.
And what this research that
we're doing here visually shows
is that when you drill
on an amalgam filling,
it's even worse than
what they imagined.
>>EDWARD: That is amazing.
If everybody saw
that, I think they
would question their dentist
before they have mercury
put in their mouth.
>>GRUBE: Exactly.
If you could see the smoke
coming out of your teeth,
you would ask a question,
why is this happening to me?
But the only reason you
could see it in this film
was because they had a
black light behind it
when the black light was
produced by a mercury tube.
So that's why you could
see the mercury coming off.
If you could see it
coming off your teeth,
you would question it.
If you could taste it,
If you could smell it,
you would question it.
But mercury doesn't do
any of those things.
You can't taste it.
You can't smell it.
You can't see it.
But it is, in fact,
coming off the teeth
like that 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, all of the time.
Now what we saw
as an evaporation,
the half life for mercury
in the body is 97 years.
So if we put mercury
fillings in your mouth,
it's going to take 97 years
for half of that mercury
to evaporate.
And then perhaps at that
point, the rest of the filling
would crumble.
And then the dentist
would do what?
Place a new mercury filling.
>>EDWARD: Put
another one in there.
So that's kind of why the
gas that's coming off it
doesn't actually
weaken the filling
or does it crack or
does it come out?
>>GRUBE: It's not enough
to weaken the filling.
But it's certainly
plenty to hurt the body.
>>EDWARD: And you said earlier,
a tiny amount of mercury
can damage the body.
Correct?
>>GRUBE: Absolutely.
Every atom of mercury
will kill a cell.
Unfortunately, then it goes
on to kill another cell.
So any mercury that
we absorb in our body,
unfortunately, we
keep for a long time.
>>EDWARD: Let's
take another look
at the documentary
"Evidence of Harm"
where experts discuss
just how little
mercury it takes to do damage.
>>SUE CASTEEL: When
a woman is pregnant,
we hope that she's never
exposed to mercury vapors,
because we know that it
can pass the placenta
and cause neurological
problems in the unborn baby.
And if we see
residences or buildings
that have 10 micrograms per
cubic meter or more of mercury,
than we consider that
it poses a health risk.
And we recommend
that people don't
stay in the building
or the residence.
>> 10 micrograms is generally
considered inhabitable without
some kind of
respiratory protection.
>> Two schools will be closed
tomorrow after a custodian
finds a small amount of
mercury on the floor of a room
at Hickman Mills High School.
>> How much mercury
are we talking about?
Not very much.
About the amount the size of
the eraser on this pencil.
But school officials
explained to us,
it would only take
the amount of mercury
about the size of the
sharpened end of this pencil
to contaminate the
entire building.
>>GRIFFIN COLE: They'll
evacuate a public building
for a broken thermometer.
But each one of your
amalgam fillings
contains roughly the
same amount of mercury.
>>EDWARD: So once the
mercury is released
in the body, what are some of
the things someone can notice?
What are the organs it affects?
What are some of the
diseases it may cause?
What are some of
the things you've
noticed over the last 50 years?
>>GRUBE: Well, that's a
very interesting question,
because it affects
all of the organs.
It affects every
cell in the body.
The moment mercury
enters into the body,
it immediately attacks
a protein molecule,
because every protein
molecule has a configuration
kind of shaped like a ball.
But someplace in that ball
is the sulfur molecule.
And mercury loves that sulfur
molecule, so it detects that.
The moment it does that, it's
now changed that protein.
So why would I
single out protein?
We've got carbohydrates.
We've got fats.
We've got proteins.
Why do I single out proteins?
Well, because every
reaction in the body--
and we have something like 3
trillion reactions per second--
every reaction in the
body requires an enzyme.
A plus B goes to C. In
the body, doesn't happen
unless there's an enzyme there.
And so well, what's
the big deal?
Well, the big deal is that all
of our enzymes are proteins.
And that's the part
that mercury attacks.
So it slows down all of
the reactions in the body.
So then you add-- that question
was kind of double-sided.
The other part of that question
was, what kind of symptoms
do you see?
Well, one of the first symptoms
you see from mercury toxicity
is irritability.
It changes your mood.
It changes the way you think.
So you're suffering
from irritability.
You might fly off the
handle for no reason.
Somebody will ask you,
how are you doing today?
And you might say, why
are you asking me that?
That's not a normal response.
So irritability is one of
the first things we see.
We see depression.
We see anxiety.
So mostly, the psychological
aspects of mercury toxicity.
Then, of course, the next
most popular thing you see
is it attacks, like I
said, the thyroid gland.
And so we have chronic fatigue
is probably the largest symptom
that our patients have.
They come into see us
with chronic fatigue,
because their thyroid is
not functioning normally,
not at all.
Then we've got stomach
problems, because the mercury
is swallowed.
They say we swallow
2,500 times a day.
That's a lot of swallowing.
Every time we swallow,
mercury goes into the stomach,
kills off the good
bacteria, the ones
that help us
produce more enzymes
so we can digest our food.
Kills off the good
bacteria and then
allows the
spirochaets, the yeast,
the fungi to proliferate.
So I jokingly, but
quite seriously, say,
show me somebody with an
amalgam filling in their mouth.
I'll show you somebody who
has way too many parasites,
has a yeast problem.
Show me something with an
amalgam filling in their mouth
and I'll show you somebody
who has allergies,
because they're not digesting
their food properly.
The food gets absorbed
through the stomach,
through the small intestines,
through the large intestines
undigested.
Well, what happens
when undigested food
enters into the bloodstream?
The body looks at
that and says, this
is not something we can use.
It's got to be bad.
Let's attack it.
And so now we've
got the beginnings
of allergies forming.
So one of my other symptoms I
had as a dental assistant was I
would break out in hives
from the top of my head
down to my toes.
And again, nobody could figure
out what I was allergic to.
Went to Mount Sinai
Hospital in New York,
had a series of
allergy tests done.
In those days,
they actually used
to poke your back with
a thousand little holes.
And each hole had an
allergen attached to it.
So you had a grid about
this big on your back.
Came back the next day
after they poked me
with all these holes
and they said, wow,
we don't know how
to tell you this,
but you're allergic
to everything.
Great.
Dr. Huggins would call that an
EI, Environmentally Ill person.
They're allergic to everything.
This is the patient
who has to put a cotton
sheet on the dental chair
so that they can sit down,
because they're allergic to the
plastics in the dental chair.
This is the person who has to
carry their own water around
with them.
They're limited to three,
perhaps four different foods
that they can eat.
And so this is the
allergies reached
the ultimate climax in severity
is when you become an EI.
And that doesn't
happen overnight.
It comes from the accumulation
of mercury in the body.
So once mercury has affected
how you think, affected
how you metabolize food,
affected how you digest food,
the only thing left is hormones.
Well, there are a
lot of hormones.
Not just hormones that
make you want to have sex.
We have hormones that make
us want to go to sleep.
We have hormones that drive us.
We have hormones for
everything in our body,
that digest your food.
Well, guess what?
Hormones are also
made of proteins.
And so mercury attacks hormones
by attacking the protein
that our body uses to
make these hormones.
>>EDWARD: How many people
do you think right now
over the age of
40, let's say, have
amalgams in their mouth
in the United States?
>>GRUBE: I would venture
to say, over the age of 40,
probably 70% have
amalgams in their mouth.
And no one has
told them that they
have a toxic material
in their mouth
that could be contributing to
whatever ailments they have.
And unfortunately,
many times, you
don't know what ailment
do you have that
is being directly
caused by your fillings.
You don't know that until the
fillings are removed properly.
Once the fillings
are removed properly,
if the ailment goes away,
well, then it's a given.
>>EDWARD: And how
many people are
put on antidepressants,
anti-anxiety medications, which
contain fluoride, and
more toxins that they're
putting into their system?
What about autoimmune?
I know you've had
done some research
with autoimmune disorders.
Can you tell us about that?
>>GRUBE: Well, here again,
when the mercury enters
into the body and it attaches
itself to one of our cells,
suppose I have a nerve
cell and now the mercury
has come and attached
itself to the nerve cell,
the body looks at
that and it knows.
Let me talk about
my own body here,
because I can be very
opinionated about that.
My body knows that every cell
has the letters B-L-A-N-C-H-E,
Blanche.
And when my immune cells
see that, ah, Blanche,
that's a good cell.
We're going to leave that alone.
Ah, Blanche, that's
a good cell too.
We're going to leave that alone.
But then all of a sudden it
sees a cell that is spelled
B-L-A-N-H-G-C-H-E. That's
no longer a Blanche cell.
That's a Blanche cell with
mercury attached to it.
The body recognizes
it as non-self,
and then begins to
attack non-self,
and then goes crazy
attacking non-self.
That is the beginning
of autoimmune disease.
>>EDWARD: How common is it for
you to see those conditions
in your practice?
>>GRUBE: Very common.
Very common.
I would say, 70% of my
practice is chronic fatigue.
Another 10% to 20% is
autoimmune disease.
And probably the last
10% are cancer patients.
>>EDWARD: And the autoimmune
patients, they most likely
are being seen by
general practitioners,
or endocrinologists,
or something like that.
>>GRUBE: Right.
But they're put
on corticosteroids
to suppress the symptoms.
They're put on
antibiotics to help
them digest better, which
it does just the opposite,
helps them digest worse.
It's very difficult once
the body has educated
itself to kill itself,
it's very difficult
to reeducate the body.
It's one of the most
difficult things to get rid of
is autoimmune disease
and allergies.
Very difficult.
>>EDWARD: So how
did their symptoms
resolve after you've taken
the mercury fillings out?
>>GRUBE: It depends
on this symptom.
Some patients, especially the--
I love chronic fatigue
patients, because they're
the ones, the next day,
they're just feeling fantastic.
As a matter, of
fact, the woman who
brought me that original
article on mercury toxicity--
she was my patient,
she brought me
the article on
mercury toxicity--
she had chronic fatigue.
I was her dentist
and I was putting
in more mercury fillings
every time she came to see me.
My husband was treating
her chiropractically
trying to make her
healthier so that you could
handle the chronic fatigue.
Then she would come
back to me and I
would put in more chronic--
I would put in more
mercury fillings.
So do you see this triangle
that was going on here?
Well, when I found out how
toxic mercury fillings were,
she was my first patient,
I called her up and I said,
I want to thank you
for opening my eyes.
I had no idea that I had
chronic meyloblastic leukemia.
I had my fillings removed.
I had my five root
canal teeth taken away.
My brain fog
disappeared overnight.
My leukemia disappeared
in three weeks.
I want to thank
you and I'm going
to remove all of your fillings.
Now done the right way,
following the Huggins protocol,
I'm going to remove all
your fillings for free.
And I did that.
This woman could
either go food shopping
or do a load of laundry.
She could not do both.
That's how severe her
chronic fatigue was.
One year after we had removed
all of her fillings properly,
she was on the ski slope at
Elk Mountain in Pennsylvania.
And she said she had just
gotten off the chairlift.
She was just about to swoosh
down when she said to herself,
oh my god, I couldn't
do this a year ago.
She was skiing.
>>EDWARD: I have
one more question.
If mercury is so toxic,
why do they allow--
what do you do when you throw
it out inside the office?
If you take a mercury
filling out, isn't there
OSHA regulations and
say that you can not
be in an environment, in a
work environment, with mercury?
How are they disposing of
this and OSHA's not closing
all these dental offices down?
>>GRUBE: That's a good question.
That's a very good question.
Our office in Pennsylvania
was the first office
in Pennsylvania to install a
mercury amalgam separator so
that when the water that
came from our dental units
went down into the basement,
the amalgam got separated.
And so we were one of
the first to do that.
And that was 28 years
ago we separated amalgam.
The government has
now passed a law
saying that all
dental offices have
to have an amalgam separator.
All dental offices have to
have an amalgam separator.
Not all of them do yet,
but they're supposed to.
So prior to the
amalgam separator,
if a dentist had scrap amalgam,
he would have to put it--
or she-- would have to put
it in a jar, a glass jar,
put it underwater, and
make sure that the glass
jar had a sealed lid on top.
And then there
were organizations
that would come to the
office and actually collect
that amalgam.
They would take it to
some mining company,
and they would process
it, and refurbish it,
and use it all over again.
And they would get a few
pennies to the dollar
for the amount of
scrap gold and they
would use it to do
some good deed with it.
But it really is blood money.
It really is blood money.
So prior to that,
we were supposed
to put it in a glass jar.
It's a very toxic material.
So think about it, if
we put it in your mouth,
well, if we're going
to follow OSHA rules,
we should have it underwater.
So put a lot of
water in your mouth.
It should be in
glass, so we're going
to have to put a glass
bubble over your head.
And we're going to
have to seal it too.
So after a few
minutes, you won't
be able to breathe too well.
Is that bizarre?
>>EDWARD: It's totally bizarre.
>>GRUBE: What a list of
contradictions in this country.
>>EDWARD: Thank you so
much for sharing all
this incredible information.
>>GRUBE: You're very welcome.
This was a pleasure.
Thank you.
>>EDWARD: In the
next episode, we'll
learn more about what mercury
can do when left in the body
and how to safely remove it.
I'm Dr. Edward Group.
Thanks for watching
"Healing Matrix".